Personality Prediction Via CV Analysis using Machine Learning
Atharva Kulkarni1, Tanuj Shankarwar1, Siddharth Thorat1
1Student, Dept. of Computer Engineering,
Thakur College of Engineering and Technology,
Maharashtra, India
Abstract - The corporate world today does not focus just on the skills a potential employee possesses but also their personality. Personality is what helps one be successful in professional as well as personal life. Hence, the recruiter must be aware of the personality traits a person has. With an exponential increase in job seekers but a decrease in the number of jobs, it is difficult to manually shortlist the best fit candidate for a suitable job by looking at the CV. This paper attempts to examine different machine learning approaches for efficiently predicting personality through CV analysis using Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques as well. Results show that the Random Forest algorithm achieved better accuracy when compared to other algorithms such as kNN, Logistic Regression, SVM and Naive Bayes.
Keywords- Personality Prediction, CV, Machine Learning
1. INTRODUCTION
The word ‘Personality’ derives from the Latin word persona which refers to a mask worn by actors to act. However, Personality is much more than a mask now, it could possibly determine whether a person is suitable for a particular job profile. It tells us if a human is capable enough to lead, influence and communicate effectively with others. The first step of recruitment is the job application which consists of personal details, experience, and most importantly CV. Companies typically receive thousands of applications per job opening and have a dedicated team of screeners to select qualified candidates. It is very difficult for human beings to manually go through the CV of all applicants. Many candidates get filtered out in the first round itself on the basis of suitability, improper CV, not being skilled enough. Hiring the right candidate is a very difficult task as no candidate is perfect, some might not be skilled enough or some might not have the right personality. Hence, we propose a way in which the process of shortlisting gets streamlined and faster by personality prediction.
CV’s can reflect upon the professional qualifications of a person but do not reflect upon the personality of a person. Personality is one of the vital factors which suggests how a person would be able to work in a designated role, hence personality analysis and understanding is key. Our objective doing this project is to make the machine more human, and analyse the candidate in such a way that an actual human reviewer would.
This paper tries to explore and implement various machine learning algorithms and analyse which one among them provides the best accuracy with a wide array of data provided. We also attempt to visualise the data and form a connection between various factors.
